---
title: "Enchantment in contemporary scholarship on economic life"
date: 2022-05-05
time: "16:30 - 19:00 GMT"
publishDate: 2022-05-31
category: events
kind: roundtable
doc: memo
link: ../events/roundtable-2022-05-05
summary: "A roundtable with Professor Jean Comaroff, Professor Jens Beckert, and Professor Robert Kozinets."
comments: roundtable-3
---

### Speakers
[Professor Jean Comaroff](https://anthropology.fas.harvard.edu/people/jean-comaroff), Harvard University

[Professor Jens Beckert](https://www.mpifg.de/people/jb1/index_en.asp), Max Planck Institute

[Professor Robert Kozinets](https://annenberg.usc.edu/faculty/robert-kozinets), University of Southern California

### Readings
Jens Beckert, Imagined Futures. Fictional Expectations and Capitalist Dynamics, HUP 2016. Chapter 8 ( Consumption, p. 188-214) and Conclusion (The Enchanted World of Capitalism, p.269-285).

Jean Comaroff, and J. Comaroff, "Millennial Capitalism: First Thoughts on a Second Coming." Public Culture 12(3) 2000: 291-343.

Jean Comaroff, and J. Comaroff,   "Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants, and Millennial Capitalism." Theory from the South, Paradigm Press 2011:153-172.

Michael Saler. As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Pre-History of Virtual Reality. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2012. Introduction (p. 3 -23)

Per Østergaard, J. Fitchett & C. Jantzen (2013). A critique of the ontology of consumer enchantment. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 12(5), 337–344.

Russell Belk, H. Weijo, and R. V. Kozinets (2021) “Enchantment and Perpetual Desire: Theorizing Disenchanted Enchantment and Technology Adoption.” Marketing Theory 21, no. 1 : 25–52.

Optional: Jenkins, R. (2000) “Disenchantment, enchantment and re-enchantment: Max Weber at the millennium." Max Weber Studies, 11-32.

### Memo
{{% author %}} By [Kristof Smeyers](https://www.uantwerpen.be/en/staff/kristof-smeyers_16210/) {{% /author %}}

<div class = "readable">

The spectre of Max Weber continues to haunt our research network. In
*The Romantic ethic and the spirit of modern consumerism* (1987),
sociologist Colin Campbell reacted against mainstream readings of Weber
by arguing that the rationalisation of capitalist markets and production
regimes, and the constraints of a so-called 'Protestant work ethic' in
fact had the complementary effect of firing up the imagination of
consumers and workers in unforeseen sensory, emotional, and bodily ways.
In Campbell's thesis, 'Romantic' consumers emerged from the Industrial
Revolution: modern people with a 'desire to consume.' In this third
roundtable, Campbell's book reappeared at several points as our speakers
Jens Beckert, Jean Comaroff and Robert Kozinets interrogated
contemporary forms of enchantment that emerge -- and flourish, in some
cases -- at the [limits of
rationality](https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9780271072470-010/pdf),
calculability and the imagination, and often at the centre of consumer
culture. Rather than approaching this culture as superficial and devoid
of meaning, they posited that the 'desire to consume' brims with
enchantment.

{{< figure src ="../images/memos/roundtable3-figure1.png" caption = "The entrance to Enchanted Island, Phoenix, Arizona. The amusement park claims to be \'filled with charm and magic.\'" >}}


*(1) What constitutes enchantment?*

The previous roundtables offered predominantly historical answers to the
question of definition. This roundtable turned to theories of
(dis-/re-)enchantment in contemporary consumer research and economic
anthropology. Riffing at times on Marx' notion of the fetishes of
commodity and his understanding of how goods are animated (or *made*
animate), Beckert, Comaroff and Kozinets described the appeal of a thing
to be purchased as a seduction, a promise, a dream, an expectation, a
charm, a surrender. (Terms that, indeed, all hint at a romantic and
enchanted sensibility.) Things can thus become conduits of personal
enchantment, as [Kozinets has argued with Russell Belk and Henri
Weijo](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1470593120961461?journalCode=mtqa),
because consumers let them -- or even consciously shape them into such
conduits.[^1] The symbolic value of a commodity, and its potential to
bring about change, are as much if not more a driver of consumption than
its actual futility.

Beckert also returned to Weber (and Campbell) to find enchantment at the
core of capitalist rationalisation processes. If those processes hinge
on the ideal of the calculability of everything, then the
unattainability of that ideal means that capitalism can only ever be
enchanted: something will always remain non-calculable and out of reach
of reason. Beckert calls this fundamentally irrational and imaginative
aspect enchantment. It is constitutive of capitalism, steering all
decision making, from investment to lotteries, in ways that remind us of
[the prevalence of astronomical prediction in
capitalism](https://economic-enchantments.net/events/roundtable-2022-03-25/).
Even when economic processes and mechanisms can be measured and
calculated, the complexity of those calculations can imbue them with a
sense of black-box mystery that could be described as enchantment: the
algorithmic complexity that now underpins some market research practices
is such an example. An algorithm's capacity for calculation is
mysterious, and that mystery has in some instances induced people to
place their trust in algorithms rather than in people. In Kozinets'
thinking, this sense of awe and wonder -- in this case for technology --
constitutes economic enchantment. The three speakers agreed on the
inherency of enchantment within capitalism, 'manifesting,' in Comaroff's
words, in different ways at every turn within capitalist structures even
as the line between the sacred and the secular is continuously shifting.

*(2) Is enchantment theorized as structural or individual phenomenon?* and *(4) Is enchantment conceptualized as manipulation or as a form of agency?*

Specifically within the context of consumer research, the question of
agency can only be answered ambiguously. Beckert, for whom it is clear
that enchantment functions as both manipulation and agency in
capitalism, reframed the question to think about whose agency precisely
we are speaking about.

Relating to that ambiguity, Beckert and Comaroff raised an important
question about the mechanisms of consumer enchantment: Who are the
enchanters? It does not suffice to think of individuals enchanting the
goods they buy without taking into account production and labour at an
organisational level. In that regard, building on the conclusion of his
book [*Imagined
futures*](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674088825),
Beckert argued that fundamental to the 'enchanted world of capitalism'
is the future industry, tasked with creating possible, promissory
futures, in business as well as in politics. This necessarily relates to
questions of power and accountability on a broader, societal level.
Imagining a future, also in economic models and forecasts, is also
always an attempt to make that future present, and to interest others --
consumers, advertisers -- in that future.

Comaroff too conceptualised enchantment as a dialectic between the
individual and the collective, and between subjective values and
historical processes. This dialectic, [Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff
have shown](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/39105), can crystallise in
concrete cultural figurations from the 'new spectral economy' such as
the zombie, which direct collective efforts to make sense of changing
market systems, and can embody anxieties as well as the promise of
empowerment of the disenfranchised and marginalised.[^2]

Who are the enchanters, then, is a question that leads at once to the
inner lives and psychologies of consumers and to large-scale,
industrialised, mass-produced forms of enchantment. Kozinets gave the
example of Disney's layer of 'pixie dust' that covers the company's
products, from theme parks to films. It also led the discussion towards
another Weberian concept: charisma, as it is for instance embodied by
modern entrepreneurial prophets from Silicon Valley -- driving home the
point that, as Kozinets contended, modern consumer enchantment can be
found primarily in technological commodities. The figure of the
entrepreneurial prophet, cultivated in the media as a charismatic leader
of our times, exemplifies the performativity of enchantment in modern
capitalism.

*(3) Is enchantment described as a continuous phenomenon, a new
phenomenon, or as historically-specific constellations?* and *(5) Is
materiality fundamental to enchantment?*

A major theme of this roundtable was the temporality of enchantment.
Durkheim said the sacred has always existed, and enchantment, too, has
sometimes been understood as a transhistorical category. But it
manifests differently in specific contexts that are historically
meaningful. The three speakers turned to this temporality from different
angles. Beckert described capitalism's orientation towards the future as
the driving force of its enchanting power. That orientation is not
predetermined; it cannot be calculated. Instead it means risk,
opportunity, ontological uncertainty, and expectations of an unknown but
imaginable future as a place of possibility.

Comaroff approached the temporality of enchantment through the lens of
historical momentum. As mentioned in the previous roundtable, moments of
social or economic crisis can foster an increased sense of magic;
magical thinking can pervade rhetoric and analysis of such crises.
Joseph Stieglitz, for instance, along with other economists, spoke of
enchantment, irrationality and magic in the markets after the crisis of
2008. Building on her work on [millennial and spectral
capitalism](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/26196), Comaroff observes
signs of the triumph of a market system -- a 'Second Coming' -- at the
end of the Cold War, and of related anxieties concerning the global
casualization of labour. Those signs are visible in an outburst of
occultism in the United States and especially in South Africa around the
millennium: a flourishing of Pentecostal and evangelical movements,
pyramid schemes and money magic, concerns about Satanism, and gospels of
prosperity that promised material wealth and winnings through
born-again, participatory spirituality. The specific historical and
geographical context of millennial South Africa rooted the zombie figure
in popular consciousness in Black rural communities and in popular
culture, as an instrument for people to think through economic conflicts
and inequalities.

Kozinets, finally, approached temporality on the level of the commodity.
Citing [Benjamin Hartmann and Katja
Brunk](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S016781161930028X),
he argued how the rhythm of consumerist enchantment (and disenchantment)
can be cyclical and how, after initial enchantment and inevitable
disenchantment, consumers 'can recover a sense of magic, myth,
specialness' of an object after having gotten used to it. (Kozinets gave
the example of the first iPhone, which at the height of its
'near-religious hype' was nicknamed the 'Jesus phone'.) The initial
wonder of a new technology or object is not sustainable. But it can be
conjured up again either as newness or, as Hartmann and Brunk have
shown, nostalgia; a sense of wonder can be reproduced in the 'new
cathedrals of consumption', from theme parks to shopping centres. This
rhythm of consumer enchantment has also been observed historically since
at least the consumer revolution, which Colin Campbell situated as
running parallel with the Industrial Revolution, as 'a fantastic realm
in which things act, speak, rise, fall, fly, evolve'.[^3]

[^1]: Belk, Weijo and Kozinets, 'Enchantment and perpetual desire:
    theorizing disenchanted enchantment and technology adoption',
    *Marketing Theory* 21:1 (2021), pp. 25-52, p. 29.

[^2]: Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff, 'Millennial capitalism: first
    thoughts on a Second Coming', in Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff,
    eds., *Millennial capitalism and the culture of neoliberalism*, p.
    2.

[^3]: Thomas Richards, *The commodity culture of Victorian England:
    advertising and spectacle, 1851-1914* (Stanford, CA: Stanford
    University Press, 1990), p. 11.

</div>
