---
title: "Enchantment in theology and scholarship on magic"
date: 2022-02-24
time: "14:30 - 17:00 GMT"
publishDate: 2022-03-18
category: events
kind: roundtable
doc: memo
link: ../events/roundtable-2022-02-24
summary: "A roundtable with Professor Owen Davies and Professor Jason Ānanda Josephson Storm."
comments: roundtable-1
---

### Speakers
[Professor Owen Davies](https://researchprofiles.herts.ac.uk/portal/en/persons/owen-davies(f0d6f1f0-37f4-4107-bb4c-91e2d36fab2e).html), University of Hertfordshire

[Professor Jason Ānanda Josephson Storm](https://religion.williams.edu/faculty/jason-josephson/), Williams College

### Readings
- Owen Davies, [‘Cunning-Folk in the Medical Market-Place during the Nineteenth Century’](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300064711). Medical History 43, no. 1 (1999): 55–73.

- Owen Davies, "Chapter 7: Pulp magic" in *Grimoires: A History of Magic Books* (Oxford, 2009).

- Jason Ānanda Josephson Storm, “Max Weber and the Rationalization of Magic,” Yelle and Trein eds., in *Narratives of Disenchantment and Secularization* (Bloomsbury, 2020), pp. 31-50.

- Jason Ānanda Josephson Storm, “The Stars are Down: Preliminary Remarks toward Theorizing Capitalism and ‘Enchantment'” Draft paper.

### Memo
{{% author %}} By [Kristof Smeyers](https://www.uantwerpen.be/en/staff/kristof-smeyers_16210/) {{% /author %}}

<div class = "readable">

'Is capitalism enchanted?' is a question that, perhaps, no longer bears
asking. Since the economic crisis that begun in 2007-2008, opinion
pieces about the irrationality of the markets or the fortune and
misfortune of the stock market refer to capitalism as, for example,
['modernity's most beguiling and dangerous form of
enchantment'](https://aeon.co/essays/capitalism-is-modernitys-most-beguiling-dangerous-enchantment).
That money and material commodity -- the promise of wealth and comfort
-- abound in 'metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties'
theorists have realized as early as Marx, who compared capitalists to
sorcerers. The categories of enchantment and religion have been popular
tools with which rationalists as well as romantics and churchgoers
criticized commerce and industry since at least the eighteenth century.

'*How* is capitalism enchanted?', on the other hand, is a question that
deserves closer attention because, as this network hopes, it opens up
alternative ways to approach the history of a range of subjects, from
market organisation to business models to advertising in the service
economy.

To begin to answer that question, this first roundtable explored the
two-way dynamic between capitalism and magic in a historical sense. The
speakers, Jason Josephson Storm and Owen Davies, have both published
extensively about the 'magical marketplace', although from very
different angles.

Josephson Storm's talk built on and expanded his work on the ['myth of
disenchantment'](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo26032843.html)
and
['metamodernism'](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo90478773.html)
by problematizing the conceptual framework of this research network:
What do we mean by 'capitalism' and 'enchantment'? This theoretical
approach proves to be an especially useful starting point, because the
definitional shifts of either concept are driven by particular purposes.
Put simply: it matters what we define as 'capitalist' or 'enchanted' --
and what we exclude from those definitions -- just as it matters to
study what people meant by those terms in different places at particular
times (and, one could add, why it became necessary or important to
define them in the first place). Approaching a concept from the
perspective of the characteristics people imbued it with, as he proposes
to do in a new article addressing the questions set by this network,
adds to Josephson Storm's previous genealogy of 'disenchantment' that
fundamentally deconstructs mainstream Weberian (but not Weber's!)
definitions of the term as the decline of magic, and proposes instead a
'disenchanting' rather than disenchanted world, where magic is
intermittently contained within its own cultural sphere.

In that regard it is worth pointing out that enchantment and/or magic
cannot exclude religion outright, as yet another concept that was
(re)developed for contingent reasons in the later nineteenth century.
Davies deepened this argument by looking at the, often hierarchical,
interpretations of the relationship between magic, religion and science
-- not coincidentally all terms that were redefined in the west, in the
nineteenth century -- and how those interpretations compared to or
contrasted with what people were 'actually engaging with on the ground'.
Davies deployed three categories to think about how the concept of magic
functions within and in relation to the economy more generally: through
material commodities, as a service economy, and as a way of thinking. As
these functions shift, so too do the meanings of 'enchantment'.

Josephson Storm also introduced a theme that will likely return in
future roundtable discussions, and which Davies went on to further
highlight in a very practical, material manner: the commodification of
magic. Enchantment has not been excluded from market logic and
consumerism: it suffices, as Josephson Storm pointed out, to look on
social media, on eBay or, as the [next roundtable](../roundtable-2022-03-25) will do, at the booming
business of astrology, to get an idea of what constitutes the modern
'magical marketplace'.

This is not new, although magical goods and services now are more
readily available than in previous centuries, often one or two clicks
away. Davies, employing social and cultural historical methods to study
how enchanted economies worked 'on the ground', turns to a few key
moments in the past four hundred years to illustrate how this magical
marketplace functioned and how, like other markets, it showed itself
versatile, flexible, and open to technological and communication
innovations. In a first instance, this means paying closer attention to
the material history of magic: how were objects produced, how were they
put on the market, how were they advertised ('the advertiser is a key
component' in presenting a product as enchanted, Davies points out), and
how were they used? The perceived authenticity or uniqueness of an
object could enshrine it with immense power, but [early
twentieth-century mass
production](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/a-supernatural-war-9780198794554?cc=be&lang=en&),
for example, did not necessarily diminish the enchanted qualities of
products such as talismans. Makers of
[grimoires](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/grimoires-9780199590049?cc=be&lang=en&),
as Davies for instance shows, profited from advances in print and
publishing industries.

{{< figure src ="../images/memos/roundtable1-figure1.jpg"
caption = "A facsimile of the Necronomicon for sale on eBay for €175.00" >}}

The 'magical marketplace' therefore also always intersects with other
parts of society that historians like to talk about in terms of
marketplaces: the medical marketplace, for example in the case of
[miracle healers and
cunning-folk](https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/popular-magic-cunningfolk-in-english-history-9780826442796/),
or the religious marketplace. Davies' focus on materiality in what
Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh has called the 'underground economy' helps to
look critically at several points that Josephson Storm also raised, such
as the continuing representations of magical or enchanted commodities
and practices as countercultural, even anti-capitalist: as 'critical
diacritic of capitalism'.[^1] Capitalism can -- and often *will* ­--
commodify anti-capitalism; and self-styled anti-capitalist magical
economies have depended on professional advertising since the early
twentieth century.

From a historical and historiographical perspective, Josephson Storm and
Davies raised many crucial points about how enchantment and magic have
always worked within economic frameworks, not outside them. Even so,
their arguments raise questions that deserve further exploration, such
as about the spaces in which this enchanted economy existed --
especially since, as Josephson Storm posits, the trope of magic is often
its dislocation. 'Underground economy', like 'enchantment' and
'capitalism' themselves, cannot be taken as a given and must be
historicized. When and in what circumstances was the market for magic
'dislocated', moved into the margins or even into criminality? As Davies
points out in his article on cunning-folk, for example, multipurpose
magical service providers moved freely in and out of the medical
marketplace until well into the nineteenth century when the field
professionalized. Josephson Storm gives the example of a contemporary
thriving psychic business on Wall Street.

These dynamics can invite us to think about enchantment and capitalism
in terms of spatiality and practices: rather than ask 'How is capitalism
enchanted?', we could ask 'How did people enchant their daily economic
transactions and their ways of thinking?' This first roundtable session
set out some important parameters of the project: for example, the
speakers stressed the importance of defining 'enchantment' and
'capitalism' in historically meaningful ways in light of the goals of
this research network. Going forward, and moving the discussion into
other disciplines with different methodologies, it will be interesting
to see how this conceptual versatility is grounded in contingent,
historical practices and ideas.

[^1]: Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh, *Off the books: the underground economy
    of the urban poor* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
    'Foreword', in Brian Moeran and Timothy de Waal Malefyt, eds.,
    *Magical capitalism: enchantment, spells, and occult practices in
    contemporary economies* (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018), v.

</div>
