---
title: "A conversation with Anat Rosenberg"
date: 2022-10-06
publishDate: 2022-10-24
kind: podcast # for the heading
layout: podcast # for the podcast page layout
doc: podcasts # for listing on resources page
comments: podcast-rosenberg
author: "Kristof Smeyers"
---

[Anat Rosenberg](https://www.runi.ac.il/en/faculty/arosenberg/) is a Senior Lecturer at the Harry Radzyner Law School, Reichman University.

{{<audio src="resources/podcasts/6.10.2022_Rosenberg_podcast.mp3" caption="">}}

### Transcript

##### 00:07 Kristof

Dear friends and fellows of the research network Enchantment in the
History of Capitalism, welcome to another podcast episode in which I
talk to scholars who work on the crossroads of the history of capitalism
and the history of enchantment. Do check us out on our website
[economic-enchantments.net](http://economic-enchantments.net/), where
you will find a wide range of exciting resources and tools.

You\'re also very welcome to sign up to our mailing list for regular
updates and for save-the-dates for future activities. So do get
involved.

My guest today is one of the founding members of our research network,
actually. [Anat
Rosenberg](https://www.runi.ac.il/en/faculty/arosenberg/) is a Senior
Lecturer at the Harry Ratner Law School at the Reichmann University in
Herzliya, Israel. Anat works on the cultural legal history of
capitalism, liberalism and consumption, primarily in Britain. In 2018,
she wrote [*Liberalizing
Contracts*](https://www.routledge.com/Liberalizing-Contracts-Nineteenth-Century-Promises-Through-Literature/Rosenberg/p/book/9781138923706),
which was a book about contracts, about binding agreements in in the
19th century.

But still hot from the press, actually, and the main reason she\'s my
guest today is Anat's latest book, *[The Rise of Mass Advertising: Law,
Enchantment, and the Cultural Boundaries of British
Modernity](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-rise-of-mass-advertising-9780192858917),*
which I think is recommended reading for all the members of our network.

So, first of all, congratulations Anat, welcome. I hope the advertising
campaign of your book is going well. Perhaps the first question that I
think relates directly to the central theme of your book, which I
haven\'t read, so this is an educated guess, but also it relates to the
aims of our network... And I think when people look at our website, they
can already see that advertising has featured quite regularly in
previous roundtables, for example, either as a form of enchantment, or
maybe as a medium for enchantment as well... Without asking you to give
too much away about your book, how does enchantment work in mass
advertising in the period you study?

And maybe related to that as well, how do you historicize something like
enchantment for the period you study?

##### 00:02:40 Anat

Yeah, these are great questions. This is where I begin in the book. So,
assuming enchantment is a historical phenomenon which doesn\'t look the
same in different places and times, it becomes a question of what
enchantment means in the context of advertising, in the context of the
19th century, and how it actually operated.

We do of course have a huge literature on enchantment and advertising,
right? And on the advertising and consumerism, I mean, we could start
with Marxist commodity fetishism and go through the entire critical
literature, and later the new literature, the new materialism and other
work which takes a more positive approach to enchantment.

But all this literature talks a lot about theories of enchantment, which
imply different things, they imply whole ontologies of possibly magic,
possibly mythological thinking, possibly mystery and wonder in the face
of market structures, efforts at transfiguration within economic
relationships.

But what does this actually mean in history? How did it look on an
everyday, mundane basis for people like you and me?

So what I\'ve tried to do at the beginning of this book is use reception
evidence in order to analyze how people interacted with advertising,
with advertisements, with mass advertising. And what experiences of
enchantment looked like. There is of course no single experience that we
could generalize, but there are symptomatic recurrences that have become
interesting to me.

One thing we should point out at the beginning is that enchantment in
the context of advertising was actually an effect of the accumulation of
advertisements. We tend to make what I have come to view as a mistake or
an unsatisfactory approach when we look at single individual adverts,
and try to generalize from their content or form about effects. I think
we should look at the way people encountered them, and they encountered
them in their accumulations.

So accumulation itself as a form, of course, there's histories or
philosophers like Walter Benjamin or \[Georg\] Simmel who have written
about accumulation in capitalism. And I think this is where we should
start. The idea of encountering mass advertising and thinking about it
as a revelation of unseen worlds, of unseen possibilities and
relationships, and energetic everyday occurrences that you could enter
imaginatively and practically by responding to an advert. So that\'s one
element of it.

And then there are of course the specific fantasies that we could start
to unravel if we look at reception evidence. For example, you know, the
all-encompassing fantasy of reconfiguring social class, right, by
engaging with economic relationships, but then also reconfiguring the
self, reconfiguring the way we look, the way we feel. Who we are. So, a
lot of different kinds of small magic, of modes of play and imagination,
that are involved in responses to mass advertising.

##### 00:06:52 Kristof

That\'s a great answer, actually. It also makes me wonder, it\'s a
refreshing take on the history of advertising more generally. There
hasn\'t really been a rich historiography of the reception side of
things. I was wondering if you could say a bit more about the challenges
of taking that perspective, maybe also elaborate a little bit about what
kind of sources you use to uncover that perspective.

##### 00:07:24 Anat

Yeah, sure. You're right that it\'s not too prevalent. Part of the
reason is, and a good reason is, that advertisers have left archives in
abundance, but getting to the encounters of regular people in their
mundane lives is not that easy because these are not usually recorded
interactions. They\'re just too small, too banal, in a way.

And yet there is evidence. There are the immediate suspects, I\'ve used
everything I could put my hands on... There are diaries and
autobiographies. There are newspaper reports. I\'ve used artworks as
well, which have been interpreted in relation to their responses to mass
advertising. There are literary works...

But perhaps one thing which is slightly less familiar. I\'ve used a lot
of court records, particularly Old Bailey records, at the Central
Criminal Court in London, which heard cases from all across the country.
So long as the advertiser was from the London area, they could be sued
there.

The good thing about the records there is there, is that there are very
good records of testimonies---more than the legal argument. They\'re not
that strong, actually, on legal analysis and legal argument. But they
are very good, well, as good as it gets, which is never perfect, about
the recording of testimonies.

I have looked at two things. First, I\'ve looked at what consumers... so
these are mostly fraud cases where someone was complaining about an
advert which deceived them, or an advertiser who deceived them. I\'ve
looked at the stories people told, why they came to an advertisement,
how it came about that they read it, and then I was also interested in
how they read, and often, on a recurring basis. I\'ve tried to look at
the kind of linguistic gestures that people make about advertising.

An obvious trope is that people said, "I saw an advertisement." And most
of the time they meant a text, actually. Most adverts were still text.
Even though the image was on the rise and was becoming important, the
majority of adverts were still text, and to understand the effects of
advertising in the period I\'m looking at, which is between the 1840s
and 1914, the 1^st^ era of mass advertising in Britain, we need to look
at the way people interacted with the banal, with the textual
advertisements which were not necessarily by leading brands.

And so people say, "I saw an advertisement" and I find that interesting.
This privileging of sight over reason, over intellectual engagement, and
also the implication of an unplanned encounter, which was usually the
case.

I\'ve looked at other elements, for example, where people use the
passive voice for themselves and the active voice for the advert, and so
when these things recur on a significant scale, you can begin to see
some form of interaction that you can theorize with. You know, the
active power of adverts as matter over minds.

##### 00:11:31 Kristof

So, it\'s about the materiality of the actual thing that is printed as
well, I suppose.

##### 00:11:36 Anat

That has mattered to me a lot. Some of the encounters, you know,
materiality is important there---we cannot entirely privilege the
intellectual over everything else. I don\'t want to privilege
materiality over intellectual, and reasoned, and emotional engagement.
But I think they are inseparable, and we cannot tell this story if we
don\'t hold them together.

##### 00:12:07 Kristof

What I like about your book as well as far as I could see, is the way
you\'ve used illustrations as well, because so many of the illustrations
are illustrations of text, so it feeds into what you just said about
seeing an advert. By putting the text advert in your book, it invites us
to see the advert as well, rather than to read it.

##### 00:12:28 Anat

Yeah, part of the story in this book is the way law in all its varieties
was mobilized by many, many different actors and participants in
cultural debate in order to deal with advertising, to understand it.
I\'ve been interested in interpretations of adverts. Often the way the
visual encounter with the text, the way the text appears, the way it is
part of a page, for example, and part of a particular medium, and part
of a particular cultural context gets lost when legal analysis kicks in.

So that\'s been part of my interest, and I have tried in the images in
the book to include textual adverts as well as visual ones, depending on
the chapter in context.

##### 00:13:25 Kristof

Circling back to law and your interest in legal history as well, I know
that you define law more as an organizing principle of social order
rather than the legal institutions more narrowly.

I was wondering, because part of your subtitle is also about the
cultural boundaries, is that part of this legal framework? Or what do
you mean specifically with cultural boundaries?

##### 00:13:54 Anat

First about law, you\'re absolutely right, I take a cultural approach to
law, by which I mean, I don\'t look at law as a profession or
institutions, but as an emergent and dispersed phenomenon which is
mobilized by different people on the levels on which it is available to
them.

So, industries might self-regulate in particular ways, local governments
might use law in other ways. Consumers, readers, viewers mobilize what
they can, in and outside courts, they are property owners, contract
parties, and so forth.

I look at all of that, in order to think of law as a cultural force
which is not above culture, but rather inseparable from a concept of
culture.

What does that have to do with boundaries? Well, one of the greatest
challenges of advertising to a prevalent sense of what British modernity
meant at that moment, was that advertising undermined the sense that
modern culture was structured according to recognizable fields of
authority. And which have their own rationalities which are somehow in
cultural charge of particular values.

What advertising did is tread on the authority of other fields. For
example, news, which was becoming very important with the advent of the
commercial press and was assuming an ideology of informational value...
Advertisers were saying, well, we are the news of commerce, and we\'re
providing information just like journalists are providing information on
other areas of life. And of course, commerce is inseparable from the
rest of life, and so we are part of the news.

They were claiming continuities with art and with ideals of aesthetic
progress in line with, by the way, the public museum movement. They were
claiming continuities with science, claiming to bring applied science
and the knowledge of applied science to the masses. They were claiming
affinities with common morality.

So, they were creating boundary anxieties. What are the boundaries
between advertising and other fields? Law, in all its varieties, was
mobilized in order to do boundary work. In order to preserve a sense of
boundaries in a reality of very blurry distinctions, and so the chapters
proceed according to different boundary anxieties. So one is about
advertising and news, and another about advertising and science. And in
each case, I look at the role of law in maintaining boundaries. This all
ties back into my interest in enchantment because the entire boundary
preservation project, if you will, was committed to rationalist
discourses and logics.

Advertising was being discussed in terms of its attempts to live up to a
variety of rationalist values and its failures, so failure was very much
part of the story. But all of this discussion of rationalist values and
their failures was really evading a discussion of the non-rational, of
enchantment as a significant part of what was happening to the economy,
of how the economy was developing at this point and so... There\'s a
legal project of disenchantment, a legal disavowal of enchantment, which
is the other side of legal boundary work. This is how it all ties
together.

##### 00:18:16 Kristof

That actually answers the question I was going to ask you as well, so I
can move on to maybe the last question that our time allows. It also
links back to the whole idea of a reception history of advertising.

I\'m myself quite interested in the vernacular or the "popular" culture
of disenchantment. So how people in the 19th and especially in the 20th
century started making those paradigms their own. And the way you
approach mass advertising seems to me like a very good way to get into a
reception history of those kind of paradigms as well, and I was
wondering if you came across such expressions of disenchantment through
this prism of mass advertising from people in the lower middle classes,
for example.

##### 00:19:08 Anat

Yes, absolutely.

This whole history actually is a history of how a culture tells itself
that it is disenchanted while actually letting enchantments become an
organizing principle. So there\'s an attention or a paradox at the heart
of these events where people are pursuing revealing a will, what I\'ve
called in the book 'a will to enchantment,' and they are actively
pursuing it. It is not a manipulation of advertisers over innocent
people, it is an active search for enchantment.

But at the same time, on the level of social story, right, how do we
describe the social order? There\'s a joint denial of the role of
enchantment and an insistence on disenchantment which cuts across
classes and in which people from high and low, and different genders,
and different backgrounds participate and cooperate. So consumers are no
more interested in describing themselves as enchanted than, say, upper
class judges are interested in describing them as such. They\'re all
willing to inhabit languages of disenchantment. So rationality or
ignorance, but not dreamworlds, right?

You can see this in a variety of cultural expressions. You can see you
know the self-description of witnesses in courts who explain how they
rationally in recent ways, how they analyzed and understood adverts and
what they describe is actually quite imaginative, but the framing is
very much pushing toward disenchantment.

You can find it toward the end in a novel which has kind of disappeared
from the history of advertising. Maybe because it\'s not a great novel,
but I think it\'s important for this history.

It's by Oliver Onions. It is so disappeared from history that I haven\'t
found new reproductions, it\'s actually not found online, where all
Victorian and Edwardian novels are now online... It is called *Good Boy
Seldom: A romance of advertisement,* and it is about a professional
advertiser. It builds on a lot of real events in the history of
advertising and also on common high and low classes responses to
advertising and their efforts to describe themselves as disenchanted, so
I think that might be a good place to start.

##### 00:22:02 Kristof

It\'s a lovely call to end our conversation as well, for people to go
and read a novel that\'s not very great from the Victorian period.

##### 00:22:15 Anat

Worth a read, I would say. I mean, he has a lot of insight, the
philosophy is good... the execution, you know, he has better ones.
Onions is known much better for his ghost stories. But I think he\'s
interested in enchantment of a different kind, it\'s explicitly present
in this novel about advertising.

##### 00:22:42 Kristof

Well, I\'ll get reading.

##### 00:22:45 Anat

Yeah, it\'s from 1911.

##### 00:22:47 Kristof

Thank you very much, Anat, and it was lovely to talk to you.

{{% credits %}} This podcast was generously funded by the [Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London](https://www.kcl.ac.uk/ddh).
<br>Musical intro is [Sleepwalking](beta.ccmixter.org/files/airtone/65416) by airtone. {{% /credits %}}
